This iSoMAs package contains the proposed “iSoMAs” (iSoform expression and somatic Mutation Association) algorithm (function `iSoMAs`), an efficient computational pipeline based on principal component analysis (PCA) techniques for exploring the association between somatic single nucleotide variant (SNV) and gene isoform expression through both cis- and trans-regulatory mechanisms. We have shown that iSoMAs is more efficient and versatile than existing methods in identification of SNV-isoform expression associations. Since iSoMAs implements differential analysis along a small number of PC coordinates (always ≤50) rather than along thousands of original transcript axes directly, it dramatically outperforms the existing models in efficiency. Furthermore, iSoMAs searches for the SNV-associated isoform expression over the whole transcriptome simultaneously, indicating its versatility compared to previous studies. Most importantly, iSoMAs overcomes the limitation of the low mutation frequencies of most cancer genes by examining the association between an SNV and the meta-isoform expression quantified as the PC score, well reducing the false positive rate incurred by the traditional gene-by-gene association study.

iSoMAs integrates sample-matched RNA-seq and DNA-seq data to study the association between gene somatic mutations and gene isoform expression. The iSoMAs workflow consists of two steps: In the first step, the high-dimensional gene isoform expression matrix (`d=59,866` derived from the `15,448` multi-isoform genes) for each cancer type is trimmed by mean.var.plot method (built in the Seurat toolkit) into a more informative expression matrix, which keeps only the most variable isoforms but is still high-dimensional (`d~3,500`). After that, the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is performed to further reduce the dimension of the informative expression matrix into a much lower-dimensional PC score matrix (`d<=50`) by calculating a PC loading matrix. Each column of the PC loading matrix performs a particular linear combination of the top variable isoforms into a meta-isoform, with the combination coefficients stored in the corresponding column of the PC loading matrix. All the meta-isoforms comprise the coordinates of the new low-dimensional space. In the second step, a differential PC score analysis is conducted along each of the 50 PC-coordinates based on the mutation status of the studied gene by Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Following the differential PC score analysis, the significant genes (termed iSoMAs genes) are determined if the minimum of the 50 p-values [defined as `minP = min{P1,P2,...,P50}`] is smaller than a predefined threshold (i.e.,`minP<1e-3`).
